.. _a_intro:

************
Key Features
************

novelWriter is a simple, multi-document plain text editor using a markup syntax inspired by
markdown to apply simple formatting to the text. It is designed for writing novels, so the
formatting features are limited.

Here are some key features:

.. centered:: *~ Focus on writing ~*

The aim of the user interface is to let the user focus on writing instead of spending time
formatting text. Formatting is therefore limited to a small set of formatting tags for simple
things like text emphasis and paragraph alignment. When you are really focused on just writing, you
can switch the editor into a full :guilabel:`Focus Mode` where only the text editor window itself
is vissible.

.. centered:: *~ Keep an eye on your notes ~*

The main window can show a document viewer to the right of the editor. It is intended for
displaying another scene document, you character notes, plot notes, or any other document you may
need while writing.

.. centered:: *~ Organise your documents how you like ~*

You can split your novel project up into as many individual documents as you want to. They are all
glued together when you build the project in the top-to-bottom order in which they appear in the
project tree. Splitting the project up into chapters and scenes means you can easily reorder
them using the drag and drop feature. More details about how projects are structured is covered in
:ref:`a_struct`.

.. centered:: *~ Keep track of your plot elements ~*

All notes in your project can be assigned a *tag* you can *reference* from any other document or
note. In fact, you can add a new tag under each heading of a note if you wish to be able to
reference a specific section. Note tags are organised into categories with specific keywords you
can use to reference them. The tag and reference syntax is covered in :ref:`a_proj` and
:ref:`a_notes`.

.. centered:: *~ Get an overview of your plot elements ~*

In the :guilabel:`Outline` tab on the main window you can see an outline of all the chapter and
scene sections of your project. If they have any references in them, these are listed in columns.
You can also add a synopsis to each document, which can be listed here. You can choose which
columns of information you want to see in the outline. You can also see a subset of the outline
information from the :guilabel:`Novel` tab under the main project tree.

.. centered:: *~ Building your manuscript ~*

Whether you want to compile a manuscript, or export all your notes, or generate an outline of your
chapters and scenes with a synopsis, you can use the :guilabel:`Build Novel Project` tool. The tool
lets you select what information you want to include in the generated document, and how it
is formatted. You can send the result to a printer, a PDF, or to an Open Document file that can be
opened by most office type word processors. See :ref:`a_breakdown_export` for more details.


.. _a_intro_screenshots:

Screenshots
===========

**novelWriter with default system theme:**

.. image:: images/screenshot_default.png
   :width: 800

**novelWriter with dark theme:**

.. image:: images/screenshot_dark.png
   :width: 800
