.. _a_proj:

**************
Novel Projects
**************

New projects can be created from the :guilabel:`Project` menu by selecting :guilabel:`New Project`.
This will open the :guilabel:`New Project Wizard` that will assist you in creating a barebone
project suited to your needs.

A novelWriter project requires a dedicated folder for storing its files on the local file system.
If you're interested in the details, you can have a look at the chapter :ref:`a_storage`.

A list of recently opened projects is maintained, and displayed in the :guilabel:`Open Project`
dialog. A project can be removed from this list by selecting it and pressing the :kbd:`Del` key or
by clicking the :guilabel:`Remove` button.

Project-specific settings are available in :guilabel:`Project Settings` in the :guilabel:`Project`
menu. See further details below in the :ref:`a_proj_settings` section. Details about the project,
including word counts, and a table of contents with word and page counts, is available through the
:guilabel:`Project Details` dialog.


.. _a_proj_roots:

Project Roots
=============

Projects are structured into a set of top level folders called "Root Folders". They are visible in
the project tree at the left side of the main window.

The :term:`novel documents` go into a root folder of type :guilabel:`Novel`. :term:`Project notes`
go into the other root folders. These other root folder types are intended for your notes on the
various elements of your story. Using them is of course entirely optional.

A new project may not have all of the root folders present, but you can add the ones you want from
the project tree tool bar.

Each root folder has one or more :term:`reference` :term:`keyword` associated with it that is used
to reference them from other documents and notes. The intended usage of each type of root folder is
listed below. However, aside from the :guilabel:`Novel` folder, no restrictions are applied by the
application on what you put in them. You can use them however you want.

The root folder system is closesly connected to how the Tags and References system works. For more
details, see the :ref:`a_references` chapter.

:guilabel:`Novel`
   This is the root folder type for text that goes into the final novel or novels. This class of
   documents have other rules and features than the project notes. See :ref:`a_struct` for more
   details.

:guilabel:`Plot`
   This is the root folder type where main plots can be outlined. It is optional, but adding at
   least brief notes can be useful in order to tag plot elements for the :guilabel:`Outline View`.
   Tags in this folder can be references using the ``@plot`` keyword.

:guilabel:`Characters`
   Character notes go in this root folder type. These are especially important if you want to use
   the :guilabel:`Outline View` to see which character appears where, which part of the story is
   told from a specific character's point-of-view, or focusing on a particular character's
   storyline. Tags in this type of folder can be referenced using the ``@pov`` keyword for
   point-of-view characters, ``@focus`` for a focus character, or the ``@char`` keyword for any
   other character present.

:guilabel:`Locations`
   The locations folder type is for various scene locations that you want to track. Tags in this
   folder can be references using the ``@location`` keyword.

:guilabel:`Timeline`
   If the story has multiple plot timelines or jumps in time within the same plot, this folder type
   can be used to track this. Tags in this type of folder can be references using the ``@time``
   keyword.

:guilabel:`Objects`
   Important objects in the story, for instance objects that change hands often, can be tracked
   here. Tags in this type of folder can be references using the ``@object`` keyword.

:guilabel:`Entities`
   Does your plot have many powerful organisations or companies? Or other entities that are part of
   the plot? They can be organised here. Tags in this type of folder can be references using the
   ``@entity`` keyword.

:guilabel:`Custom`
   The custom root folder type can be used for tracking anything else not covered by the above
   options. Tags in this folder type can be references using the ``@custom`` keyword.

The root folders correspond to the categories of tags that can be used to reference them. For more
information about the tags listed, see :ref:`a_references_references`.

.. note::
   You can rename root folders to whatever you want. However, this doesn't change the reference
   keyword or what they do.

.. versionadded:: 2.0
   As of version 2.0, you can make multiple root folders of each kind to split up your project.


.. _a_proj_roots_del:

Deleted Documents
-----------------

Deleted documents will be moved into a special :guilabel:`Trash` root folder. Documents in the
trash folder can then be deleted permanently, either individually, or by emptying the trash from
the menu. Documents in the trash folder are removed from the :term:`project index` and cannot be
referenced.

A document or a folder can be deleted from the :guilabel:`Project` menu, or by pressing
:kbd:`Ctrl+Shift+Del`. Root folders can only be deleted when they are empty.


.. _a_proj_roots_out:

Archived Documents
------------------

If you don't want to delete a document, or put it in the :guilabel:`Trash` folder where it may be
deleted accidentally, but still want it out of your main project tree, you can create an
:guilabel:`Archive` root folder and move it there.

You can drag any document to this folder and preserve its settings. The document will always be
excluded from the :guilabel:`Compile Manuscript` tool. It is also removed from the
:term:`project index`, so the tags and references defined in it will not show up anywhere else.


.. _a_proj_roots_orphaned:

Recovered Documents
-------------------

If novelWriter crashes or otherwise exits without saving the project state, or if you're using a
file synchronisation tool that runs out of sync, there may be files in the project folder that
aren't tracked in the core project file. These files, when discovered, are recovered and added back
into the project.

The discovered files are scanned for metadata that give clues as to where the document may
previously have been located in the project. The project loading routine will try to put them back
as close as possible to this location, if it still exists. Generally, it will be appended to the
end of the folder where it previously was located. If that folder doesn't exist, it will try to add
it to the correct root folder type. If it cannot figure out which root folder is correct, the
document will be added to the :guilabel:`Novel` root folder. Finally, if the :guilabel:`Novel`
folder is missing, one will be created.

If the title of the document can be recovered, the word "Recovered:" will be added as a prefix to
indicate that it may need further attention. If the title cannot be determined, the document will
be named after its internal key, which is a string of characters and numbers.


.. _a_proj_roots_lock:

Project Lockfile
----------------

To prevent lost documents caused by file conflicts when novelWriter projects are synchronised via
file synchronisation tools, a project lockfile is written to the project folder. If you try to open
a project which has such a file present, you will be presented with a warning, and some information
about where else novelWriter thinks the project is also open. You will be given the option to
ignore this warning, and continue opening the project at your own risk.

.. note::
   If, for some reason, novelWriter crashes, the lock file may remain even if there are no other
   instances keeping the project open. In such a case it is safe to ignore the lock file warning
   when re-opening the project.

.. warning::
   If you choose to ignore the warning and continue opening the project, and multiple instances of
   the project are in fact open, you are likely to cause inconsistencies and create diverging
   project files, potentially resulting in loss of data and orphaned files. You are not likely to
   lose any actual text unless both instances have the same document open in the editor, and
   novelWriter will try to resolve project inconsistencies the next time you open the project.


.. _a_proj_roots_dirs:

Using Folders in the Project Tree
---------------------------------

Folders, aside from root folders, have no structural significance to the project. When novelWriter
is processing the documents in a project, like for instance when you create a manuscript from it,
these folders are ignored. Only the order of the documents themselves matter.

The folders are there purely as a way for you to organise the documents in meaningful sections and
to be able to collapse and hide them in the project tree when you're not working on those
documents.

.. versionadded:: 2.0
   As of version 2.0 it is possible to add child documents to other documents. This is particularly
   useful when you create chapters and scenes. If you add separate scene documents, you should also
   add separate chapter documents, even if they only contain a chapter heading. You can then add
   scene documents as child items to the chapters.


.. _a_proj_files:

Project Documents
=================

New documents can be created from the toolbar in the :guilabel:`Project Tree`, or by pressing
:kbd:`Ctrl+N`. This will open the create new item menu and let you choose between a number of
pre-defined documents and folders. You will be prompted for a label for the new item.

You can always rename an item by selecting :guilabel:`Rename Item` from the :guilabel:`Project`
menu, or by pressing :kbd:`F2`.

Other settings for project items are available from the context menu that you can activate by
right-clicking on an item in the tree. The :guilabel:`Transform` submenu includes options for
converting, splitting, or merging items. See :ref:`a_ui_tree_split_merge` for more details on the
latter two.


.. _a_proj_files_counts:

Word Counts
-----------

A character, word and paragraph count is maintained for each document, as well as for each section
of a document following a :term:`heading<headings>`. The word count and change of words in the
current session is displayed in the footer of any document open in the editor, and all stats are
shown in the details panel below the :guilabel:`Project Tree` for any document selected in the
project or novel trees.

The word counts are not updated in real time, but run in the background every few seconds for as
long as the document is being actively edited.

A total project word count is displayed in the status bar. The total count depends on the sum of
the values in the project tree, which again depend on an up to date :term:`project index`. If the
counts seem wrong, a full project word recount can be initiated by rebuilding the project's index.
Either from the :guilabel:`Tools` menu, or by pressing :kbd:`F9`.


.. _a_proj_settings:

Project Settings
================

The :guilabel:`Project Settings` can be accessed from the :guilabel:`Project` menu, or by pressing
:kbd:`Ctrl+Shift+,`. This will open a dialog box, with a set of tabs.


Settings Tab
------------

The :guilabel:`Settings` tab holds the project name, title, and author settings.

The :guilabel:`Project Name` can be set to a different value than the :guilabel:`Novel Title`. The
difference between them is simply that the :guilabel:`Project Name` is used for the GUI (main
window title) and for generating backup files. The intention is that the :guilabel:`Project Name`
should remain unchanged throughout the project's lifetime, otherwise the name of exported files and
backup files may change too.

The :guilabel:`Novel Title` and :guilabel:`Authors` settings are used when building the manuscript,
for some formats.

If your project is in a different language than your main spell checking language is set to, you
can override the default setting here. You can also override the automatic backup setting. The
project language can also be changed from the :guilabel:`Tools` menu.


Status and Importance Tabs
--------------------------

Each document or folder of type :guilabel:`Novel` can be given a *Status* label accompanied by a
coloured icon, and each document or folder of the remaining types can be given an *Importance*
label.

These labels are there purely for your convenience, and you are not required to use them for any
other features to work. No other part of novelWriter accesses this information. The intention is to
use these to indicate at what stage of completion each novel document is, or how important the
content of a note is to the story. You don't have to use them this way, that's just what they were
intended for, but you can make them whatever you want.

See also :ref:`a_ui_tree_status`.

.. note::
   The status or importance level currently in use by one or more documents cannot be deleted, but
   they can be edited.


Auto-Replace Tab
----------------

A set of automatically replaced keywords can be added in this tab. The keywords in the left column
will be replaced by the text in the right column when documents are opened in the viewer. They will
also be applied to manuscript builds.

The auto-replace feature will replace text in angle brackets that is in this list. The syntax
highlighter will add an alternate colour to text matching the syntax, but it doesn't check if the
text is in this list.

.. note::
   A keyword cannot contain spaces. The angle brackets are added by default, and when used in the
   text are a part of the keyword to be replaced. This is to ensure that parts of the text aren't
   unintentionally replaced by the content of the list.


.. _a_proj_backup:

Backup
======

An automatic backup system is built into novelWriter. In order to use it, a backup path to where
the backup files are to be stored must be provided in :guilabel:`Preferences`.

Backups can be run automatically when a project is closed, which also implies it is run when the
application itself is closed. Backups are date stamped zip files of the project files in the
project folder (files not strictly a part of the project are ignored). The zip archives are stored
in a subfolder of the backup path. The subfolder will have the same name as the
:guilabel:`Project Name` as defined in :ref:`a_proj_settings`.

The backup feature, when configured, can also be run manually from the :guilabel:`Tools` menu.
It is also possible to disable automated backups for a given project in
:guilabel:`Project Settings`.

.. note::
   For the backup to be able to run, the :guilabel:`Project Name` must be set in
   :guilabel:`Project Settings`. This value is used to generate the name and path of the backups.
   Without it, the backup will not run at all, but it will produce a warning message.


.. _a_proj_stats:

Writing Statistics
==================

When you work on a project, a log file records when you opened it, when you closed it, and the
total word counts of your novel documents and notes at the end of the session, provided that the
session lasted either more than 5 minutes, or that the total word count changed. For more details
about the log file, see :ref:`a_storage`.

A tool to view the content of the log file is available in the :guilabel:`Tools` menu under
:guilabel:`Writing Statistics`. You can also launch it by pressing :kbd:`F6`, or find it on the
sidebar.

The tool will show a list of all your sessions, and a set of filters to apply to the data. You can
also export the filtered data to a JSON file or to a CSV file that can be opened by a spreadsheet
application like for instance Libre Office Calc or Excel.

.. versionadded:: 1.2
   As of version 1.2, the log file also stores how much of the session time was spent idle. The
   definition of idle here is that the novelWriter main window loses focus, or the user hasn't made
   any changes to the currently open document in five minutes. The number of minutes can be altered
   in :guilabel:`Preferences`.
